# mozambique_genomic_epi_analysis
https://github.com/CERI-KRISP/mozambique_genomic_and_epidemology_analyses Authors: Nalia Ismael 1* and Stephanie van Wyk 2,3, Houriiyah Tegally 2,3,Jennifer Giandhari 2,3, James Emmanuel San 2,3, Monika Moir 2,3, Sureshnee Pillay 2,3, Christian Utpatel 4, Lavanya Singh 2,3, Yeshnee Naidoo 2,3, Upasana Ramphal 2,3, Nédio Mabunda 1, Nuro Abílio 1, Paulo Arnaldo 1, Arsenia Massinga 6, Alfredo Mayor 7, Inacio Mandomando 6,7, Christiane Gerlach 4, Joicymara S. Xavier 2,3, Yajna Ramphal2,3, Arisha Maharaj 2,3, Leonardo de Araujo 4, Ugochukwu J. Anyaneji 2,3,Derek Tshiabuila 2,3, Sofia Viegas 1, Richard Lessells 2,3, Susan Engelbrecht 5, Eduardo Samogudo 1, Ilesh Jani 1,Stefan Niemann 4, Eduan Wilkinson 2,3, Túlio de Oliveira 2,3* 1 Instituto Nacional de Saúde (INS), Marracuene, Mozambique, nalia.ismael@ins.gov.mz (N.I), nedio.jonas@ins.gov.mz (N.M), paulo.arnaldo@ins.gov.mz (P.A), nurojaimeabilio@gmail.com (N.A), sofia.viegas@ins.gov.mz (S.V), eduardo.samogudo@ins.gov.mz (E.G), ilesh.jani@ins.gov.mz (I.J) 2 Centre for Epidemic Response and Innovation (CERI), School of Data Science and Computational Thinking, Stellenbosch University; Stellenbosch, South Africa.; stephanievanwyk@sun.ac.za (S.v.W), monikam@sun.ac.za (M.M), ewikinson@sun.ac.za (E.W), nadooy@sun.ac.za (Y.N), 26700689@sun.ac.za (Y.R), joicy.xavier7@gmail.com (J.S.X) yajna.ramphal@gmail.com (YR), tulio@sun.ac.za (T.d.O) 3 Kwazulu-Natal Research Innovation and Sequencing Platform (KRISP), Nelson R Mandela School of Medicine, University of Kwazulu-Natal; Durbam, South Africa; sanemmanueljames@gmail.com(S.E.S), houriyah.tegally@gmail.com (H.T), jennifer.giandhari@gmail.com (J.G), pillaysureshnee@gmail.com (P.S), Singhl@ukzn.ac.za (L.S), upasanaramphal@gmail.com(U.R), derektshiabuila@gmail.com (D.T), LessellsR@ukzn.ac.za (Le.S), 26696827@sun.ac.za (A.M), 217080488@stu.ukzn.ac.za (U.A)
4 Molecular and Experimental Mycobacteriology, Research Center Borstel, Borstel, Germany; cutpatel@fz-borstel.de (C.U); cgerlach@fz-borstel.de (C.G), LdeAraujo@fz-borstel.de (L.d.A); sniemann@fz-borstel.de (S.N) 5 Division of Medical Virology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town 8000, South; susanen@sun.ac.za (S.E) 6 Centro de Investigação em Saúde de Manhiça (CISM), Manhiça, Moçambique, Bairro Cambeba, Rua 12 1121, Inacio.mandomando@manhica.net (I.M), arsenia.massinga@manhica.net (A.M)
7 Institute for Global Health (ISGlobal), Hospital Clínic - Universitat de Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Spain, alfredo.mayor@isglobal.org (A.M)

Correspondence: nalia.ismael@ins.gov.mz (N.I), deoliveira@ukzn.ac.za.com (T.d.O); Tel.: +27 82 962 4219 (T.d.O)
Abstract: Mozambique reported the first case of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in March 2020. Since then, the virus has spread to all provinces in the country. Here we set out to perform a retrospective molecular epidemiological analysis of the first 25 months of the epidemic in Mozambique. In total, 1 191 whole genome sequences from Mozambique were phylogenetically analyzed against a globally representative set of references to put the epidemic in the country into context. The domestic pandemic was marked by four successive waves of infection, with the first wave associated with B.1 ancestral lineages, while the Beta, Delta, and Omicron Variants of Concern (VOCs) were responsible for the majority of cases and death during the second, third, and fourth waves. Viral exchanges between Mozambique and the outside world mimicked pandemic waves, with most exchanges occurring during the second, third, and forth waves and most imports and exports being attributed to South Africa. Due to a health system already under constraint and paucity of data in Mozambique, there is a need to continue to strengthen and support genomic surveillance in the country as VOCs and Variants of interests (VOIs) are often reported from the southern African region.
Figure 2: A) Schematic illustration of genomic and epidemiological data. Changes in the daily reported COVID-19 cases are indicated in blue, the cumulative death count associated with COVID-19 disease in orange, and the estimated Re values are indicated in purple. B) Geographic map of Mozambique illustrating the origin and count genome sequences generated in this study.

Figure 3: Lineage and Phylogenetic Analysis. (A) Phylogenetic tree of SARS-CoV-2 sequences representing global and Mozambique subsets during the first 25 months of the pandemic. Taxa obtained from Mozambique are illustrated with circles and the lines represent taxa from the global dataset. (B) Lineage through time plots illustrate the change in genetic diversity of sequenced genomes sampled in Mozambique throughout the study period.

Figure 4: SARS-CoV-2 import and export events inferred for Mozambique. The bar charts illustrate the average number of SARS-CoV-2 introduction events (top), and the average number of export events (bottom).
